If you want to grow on Instagram,
maximizing SEO is more important now
than ever before. As of the day that
this podcast is releasing, July 10th,
2025, Instagram is essentially making
the entire platform searchable. This
means that your posts, your captions,
your reels, and pretty soon your entire
profile are going to be able to show up
in search results on Google and other
top search engines. This is awesome news
for two reasons. Number one, more than
ever before, people are turning to
social media like Instagram to search
for things. Whether it's a local small
business, a shop, or a product that
they're looking for, people are looking
to Instagram and social media more
generally for their results rather than
the typical search engines that we've
been used to for the last 20 years. And
even if that wasn't the case, the second
reason that this is great news is that
now our Instagram posts will show up
under Google search results. This means
potentially more views, more exposure,
more followers, and more customers from
your business through Google because of
what you're posting on Instagram. In
today's episode, I'm going to share with
you the three key things that you need
to know in order to maximize your reach
and grow your following thanks to this
new SEO change. And this is a change
that is not unexpected. We saw this
coming. For the last five years here at
Build Your Tribe, we've been telling you
to start improving your SEO skills on
Instagram because hashtags are being
phased out. It's crazy that to this day
people will argue with me about this
topic. But according to Adam Ozeri, the
CEO of Instagram himself in my interview
with him, which was a former episode of
this podcast, hashtags are not a
reliable way to increase your reach.
They don't significantly increase your
reach on Instagram. Contrary to popular
belief, it's just not an important thing
for for reach.
Hashtags were invented as a way to
basically help the algorithm with SEO.
Basically, hashtags were a way to say,
"Hey, algorithm, this is a picture of #
New York pizza." But now the algorithm
has become so advanced and the machine
learning and artificial intelligence
that runs the numerous Instagram
algorithms is so intelligent it can look
at your photo or your reel, scan it, and
figure out what it is or what it's about
without you having to tell it. But it's
still not perfect. It makes mistakes.
For example, just last week I posted a
carousel that was titled 37 real ideas
for July. And then yes, of course, it
had 37 real ideas on each of the
subsequent slides. But on the first
slide of that carousel, I was wearing a
meme t-shirt that said rare fish
investor. And so because of that
t-shirt, the algorithm misdiagnosed what
my post was about. And instead, the
algorithm now believes that that post is
about rare fish investing strategies. So
number one, yes, the algorithm has
absolutely improved. And because of
that, number two, hashtags are no longer
an essential tool for growth on
Instagram, but the algorithm still needs
help. It's not perfect. And so that's
where SEO or search engine optimization
comes into play. And that's what we're
going to focus on for the remainder of
today's episode. Making sure that your
Instagram posts are optimized in order
to show up at the top of search results
is all about keywords. Keywords are
simply the words and phrases that people
would be typing into search engines in
order to discover what it is they're
looking for. Basically, they're words or
short phrases that describe your post.
For example, if I was to post a picture
of this little yellow Converse toy shoe,
I might say yellow Converse toy, yellow
Converse shoe, mini yellow Converse. If
I just did shoe as one of my keywords, I
would then have to compete with every
other post on Instagram that has talked
about shoes or has used hashtag shoes or
has just been a photo or video of shoes.
So basically, keywords are just terms
and phrases that specifically describe
your post or what it's about. But in
order to show up at the top of search
results and thus get more views and
followers and potentially customers from
Google and other search engines, here
are the three key things that you need
to do. Number one, you need to empathize
with your target market. Now, one of the
foundational principles to growing on
Instagram that I've always taught is
that you need to niche down. And part of
niching down, as I define it and as I
teach, is having a clear understanding
of your target demographic. Basically,
who do you want to follow your account?
I believe that the more specific you get
with your target audience, the faster
you will grow and the more of a loyal,
engaged superfan community you will
build. Now, that doesn't mean that you
need to exclude everyone else or turn
everyone else away. But when you have
super clear demographics, age groups,
race, religion, marital status,
education level, employment status, all
of that stuff, the more you know about
your target audience, the more you can
create content that really resonates
with them. For example, on Instagram, my
target audience is over the age of 35.
Do I have people under the age of 35
following me? Absolutely. But because my
target demographic is small business
owners who are over the age of 35, I'm
not going to use Gen Z slang like Riz or
Skibby in any of my posts because it's
either going to go over the heads of the
people who follow me or the people who I
want to follow me or it's going to annoy
them because those are the words that
are overused by their children. people
who live in different areas of the world
or who have different levels of
education or are have different
relationship statuses or different
employment statuses or different
political affiliations, they're going to
search for things differently. The
specific words and phrases that they are
going to use when looking things up
online are going to vary. And when you
have a crystal clear picture in your
mind of who you are trying to attract to
your page, you're able to use the words
that they are using. And that will make
sure that when they use those terms in
Google or Yahoo or Bing or whatever
search engine they're using, your posts
are actually showing up. Now, even the
most empathetic person on the planet
might still struggle to figure out what
are they actually searching for. Like
what terms and phrases are they actually
using? Because sure, you could do market
research and you can poll people on the
streets of New York City or you can, you
know, run online forums and test group
people. But the much easier way to
figure out what your target demographic
is actually searching for online is step
number two for dominating Instagram with
SEO, and it's to use online tools that
have the answers for you. Here are my
top four favorite tools to use in
keyword research. Basically, when I'm
coming up with a post, when I have an
idea for a script or a topic that I want
to cover, I will oftent times go to one
of these four tools first and then
figure out what specific words or
phrases I need to include in that post
in order for myself to show up at the
top of search engine results. Tool
number one is good old ChatGpt.
ChatgPT40 can search the internet. So,
it's not just giving you results from a
few years ago, it's giving you
up-to-date results. Here is a prompt
that I love to use for chatbt. Feel free
to use this for yourself. Act like an
SEO expert. My target audience is and
then tell Chat GBT who your target
audience is and I'm creating a post
about and then give it the specific
topic that you want to create a post
about. For example, maybe your target
audience is new moms in their 30s
looking to lose weight naturally. And
maybe the specific topic is healthy
snack ideas to boost energy. And then
the rest of the prompt is, "What are the
most searched keywords and phrases that
relate to this topic and are used by
this audience?" List the top 20 keywords
or search terms that they might be
typing into Google or Instagram. Of
course, then when you use that prompt,
Chat GBT will give you 20 keywords or
phrases that you can organically work
into your posts, which by the way,
towards the end of this episode, I'm
going to share with you the different
areas of your post that it's important
to consider including SEO to make sure
that you show up at the top of search
results. Tool number two is one that
I've been using and recommending for
years, and it's answerthepub.com.
It's a really useful tool where you can
enter in one to two keywords that relate
to the post that you plan on making and
answer the public will give you a
plethora of data. So much information
and all of this information comes from
what people are searching for the most.
It will give you the most popular search
terms with each letter of the alphabet.
It will give you the most popular
searched comparisons. So, if you did
like healthy snacks, maybe it would be
healthy snacks versus unhealthy snacks
or healthy snacks versus organic snacks.
I don't know. But when you use Answer
the Public, you can see the real data of
what people are searching for the most,
and it's super helpful. Another really
helpful tool that is similar to Answer
the Public is keyword tool.io.
Keyword tool.io allows you to get a
little bit more specific with what
you're searching. So you can not just
type in the keyword that you're looking
for, you can also filter it by certain
geographic regions and certain
languages. So again, if you want to get
a little bit more specific or targeted
with who you're trying to reach on
Instagram, can be a great tool to check
out. And then my fourth tool that I
often use for keyword research is just
Google Trends. If you go to Google and
you type in Google Trends, you can go to
Google Trends and Google Trends will
allow you to basically compare the
popularity of different search terms.
So, I remember one time I was working
with someone who did balloon art, like
they did those balloon archways that you
see at weddings or at like corporate
events. And so, in their bio on
Instagram, they said that they were a
balloonist. And I didn't think that that
was a very popular term. I'm not an
expert in that industry. I'm not an
expert in the events space industry or
in the balloon art industry, but I guess
my assumption was that balloonist wasn't
the most popular term. So, I went to
Google Trends and I compared the terms
balloon artist and balloonist and
balloon artist had significantly higher
search volume. And so, this led me to
advise her to remove balloonist from her
Instagram bio and replace it with
balloon artist in order to show up in
more search results. Step number three
for maximizing your return on investment
on Instagram by showing up in the most
possible search results is to check. And
of course, you could go to Google and
search for terms that are relating to
your Instagram and see if you're coming
up as one of the top search results. You
could do that. But there's a much easier
way that I'm a big fan of, and it's a
new Instagram feature that not many
people are talking about. This Instagram
feature is called recommended search.
And yes, it's yet another Instagram
feature that was stolen from Tik Tok.
Basically, the recommended search is a
prompt that Instagram provides for your
viewers that they think they might be
interested in searching for based off of
your post. Remember earlier when I gave
you that example of the post that I made
that the Instagram algorithm thought was
about rare fish investing financials?
Well, I knew that that's what the
algorithm thought my post was about
because that was the suggested search on
my post. Now, not everyone has this
feature just yet. So, definitely keep
updating your app and keep checking to
see if you have this feature, but once
you do, all you have to do is go to your
comments section on any post that you
have recently made and look for the
hyperl text up at the top, and that is
the recommended search. And again, the
recommended search is a super helpful
way to figure out what Instagram thinks
your post is about. If that recommended
search isn't related to your post, like
mine wasn't in the July real ideas/fish
investing strategies post, well then you
know that the next time you make that
post, you're going to have to change
some things up. Or if you're going to
recreate that post, there's some things
you're going to have to do differently
to make sure that whatever keywords you
want to be standing out are actually
standing out and not just rare fish
investing strategies. One of the really
big questions that it's important that
we talk about is what does the algorithm
look at and what does it not look at?
Because for quite a while, a lot of
people were saying the algorithm only
looks at your caption. It doesn't look
at what's in your post. It doesn't look
at anything else. All that it looks at
is your caption. And I think it's pretty
clear that that's not the case. At least
not anymore. Because if the algorithm
thinks my post is about rare fish
investment strategies because that was
just written on my t-shirt, then it's
clear that the algorithm is looking at
my post. So rather than telling you what
I think the case is, I'll tell you
exactly what the head of Instagram, Adam
Moseri, said in my interview with him.
He said that the algorithm looks at the
following four things in this order.
Number one is yes, the caption. That's
the easiest thing for the algorithm to
look at because it doesn't have to do
very much work. It's already written
text. It's very easy for the algorithm
to analyze the text that's in your
caption. So, make sure that you are
including these SEO keywords, terms, and
phrases organically in your caption.
We're going to come back to that word
organically in just a little bit. The
second thing that the Instagram
algorithm looks at, the second most
important area to include SEO keywords
and phrases is in your spoken audio.
Now, I know that not every reel that
you're creating includes spoken audio,
but if you are doing a direct to camera
talking headstyle reel or even a
voiceover reel, make sure that your
spoken audio includes words or phrases
that relate to the post and that
describe what the post is about. The
third most important area to include
these keywords is in the visuals. So,
maybe not in the actual words or even
closed captions on your video, but what
the video actually is. And this is where
things like text on the screen or
visuals really matter. Basically, if
you're to post a reel on Instagram, the
algorithm doesn't watch the entire reel.
It instead takes little screenshots.
Basically, it pulls out key frames or
pauses in your video and then it
analyzes each of those freeze frames.
And so if your video is cluttered, if
there's a lot of visually distracting
things, if you're wearing a t-shirt that
says rare fish investor, or you're using
props that somehow don't relate to your
video, this can detract from your search
engine optimization, or if nothing else,
makes it harder for the algorithm to
determine what your post is about. So
just be mindful of what's on the screen,
be mindful of the visuals, be mindful of
what the text on your shirt says. And
then the fourth most important metric
that the algorithm looks at to determine
what your post is about is actually the
comments. And this is an area that
Instagram actually wants to put more
weight into. They want to prioritize the
algorithm scanning your comments section
because basically their hunch is that if
a lot of people are commenting about one
subject, that's going to be a much
better indicator of what people are
interested in or what the recommended
search should be than what you said in
the post. And this is something that Tik
Tok has truly mastered. I can't tell you
how many times I've seen a Tik Tok video
and there was a word or a person
mentioned in the video and I'm like,
"What does that word mean?" or "What
does that story? Who is that person?"
And then when I go to the comment
section, the recommended search is that
person's name. The not the person who
created the video, but the person who
was mentioned in the video who maybe not
everyone knows, myself included. And so
Instagram is continuing to beef up how
much the algorithm looks at the comment
section. And so one pro tip that you can
use to really take advantage of this
knowledge is to start commenting on your
own posts. Now you don't need to comment
15 times. You don't need to comment five
times, but just simply one comment on
your own post can be an effective way to
nudge the algorithm in the right
direction. Something that I often do
when I'm scheduling posts on Metricool
is I will schedule the first comment
automatically. Or if I've manually
posted a reel or a carousel myself, I'll
just hop right into the comment section
and I'll leave a comment. Maybe I'm
asking a question, getting the
conversation going. Maybe I'm adding
like a little inside joke or side
comment that somehow relates to the
video. But all of this helps the
algorithm figure out what my post is
about and not get confused. Now, like I
said in the first sentence of this
episode, July 10th, 2025 is the date
that our posts become searchable. Our
profiles have already been somewhat
searchable for years, and in the near
future, they are going to be totally
searchable as well. Currently, as it
stands, there are two areas of your
Instagram profile that are directly
searchable. Meaning that if you put any
word or phrase on one of these two lines
and then someone searches for that word
or phrase on Google, your Instagram will
show up. The first one is the obvious
one. It's the one that you can already
think of. It's the username. If my
username is Brock 11 Johnson, which it
is, and you should follow me, by the
way. I'm also on a million followers and
that'd be really awesome if you help me
get to a million followers. But Brock 11
Johnson is my username. And so if you
look up Brock 11 Johnson on Google, you
will find my Instagram. You might find
some of my other socials and other stuff
as well, but you will find my Instagram.
That's pretty self-explanatory. But the
second area of your Instagram profile
that is currently 100% searchable that
most people overlook, and this is a
super common mistake is the Instagram
name. The Instagram name is that bold
text that's right below your username.
And for those of us who have a personal
brand or even just a personal account on
Instagram, what do we put on that line?
We just put our name. For those of us
who have a business brand or who have a
shop and and we sell things for our
business on Instagram, what do we
normally put on that line? The name of
our business. But here's the problem
with that. Most people don't know our
name or our business's name. And so
instead, we need to put keywords,
titles, or SEO friendly terms and topics
on that Instagram name line. For
example, when you look at my Instagram
bio, my username is Brock 11 Johnson. so
that if someone searches Brock Johnson
or they search Brock 11 Johnson, hi,
I'll show up. But on my Instagram
nameline, it says Instagram growth
coach. That way, if someone is looking
up that term, they will find me.
Instagram allows us to have up to 56
characters on that Instagram nameline.
And so it's okay if you want to have
your first name or maybe even your first
and last, but it's most important that
you have some SEO friendly keywords and
phrases on that line so that you show up
in popular search engine results.
Unfortunately, as it currently stands,
our Instagram bio is not searchable.
Whether you're searching on Instagram or
off of Instagram, the words you put in
your bio are not likely to influence
what results you show up as. They might
slightly impact the algorithm's
understanding of your account and what
you're about, but they're not directly
searchable. With that being said,
Instagram does have plans in the next
few months to continue to improve the
SEO capabilities of both Instagram and
of other search engines searching for
things on Instagram. So, it's very
likely that if not by the end of 2025,
that at some point in 2026, your entire
Instagram bio will be searchable. So,
make sure to use some of those tools
earlier and empathize with your target
market to figure out what words and
phrases they're using and then put those
words and phrases in your bio. If you
can do even half of what I have outlined
in today's episode, you will put
yourself ahead of most other brands and
business owners on Instagram. I want to
encourage you not to stress out over
this topic, not to freak out over SEO.
Basically, use the words that people in
your audience would already be using and
you should be good to go. And I do want
to say, I told you we would come back to
this idea of organic use. When SEO first
started to rise in popularity on
Instagram just a few years ago, there
was a hack that someone came up with. I
don't know who came up with it. Even if
I did, I wouldn't name them cuz I don't
want to shame them, but there was a hack
where people would do one of two things.
They would either type out a list of
keywords and then put it at the bottom
of their caption. kind of the way some
people used to do it with their
hashtags, but instead of saying hashtag
New York pizza # rarefishinvestor, they
would just write New York pizza, rare
fishinves investor, orange county mom,
comma. That is called keyword stuffing.
Instagram has explicitly said that if
you do this, if you participate in this
practice, the algorithm can recognize
that. It deems it as spammy behavior and
it will downrank your content because of
it. So, do not write a long list of
keywords at the bottom of your caption.
The second hack, which is even crazier
that some people came up with this, was
that you should take those keywords, the
ones that you were going to put at the
bottom of your caption and instead put
them on your reel, but then color match
them to the background. So, if you're
watching on YouTube right now, I would
like write a list of keywords, and then
I would make it a dark green so that it
blended in with my background, and then
I'd pinch the text super small, and I'd
put it up in a corner so that the human
eye couldn't see it. But the thought
from these gurus was that the algorithm
could see it and then it would really
boost uh the algorithm in doing its job
and figuring out what your post is
about. No, stop doing that. That is also
considered keyword stuffing and that
will also negatively impact your post's
performance. So what should you do
instead? Organically use the words. Put
the words into sentences. Use the words
that your post is about. Be descriptive
in your actual content, in the words
you're saying, the text on the screen,
the caption. Organically use the words.
Don't put a long list of keywords.
Organically mix the keywords into your
content. This is something that will
take a little bit of practice and it
will take a little bit of refining to
organically include words that you might
not have organically said otherwise, but
over time, this will become easier. And
of course, you could use AI to help you
with your script writing or with your
caption writing. so you can more
organically kind of massage those
keywords into the way you speak or the
way you write without having to stress
out over it. With all of this being
said, I have created a free guide to SEO
keywords and hashtags on Instagram. If
you want to check that out, I'll link
that up down in the show notes below.
But if nothing else, I hope you
subscribe. I hope you learned something
today. And as always, happy networking.